1 Introduction

Welcome to today’s tour of the Lower Downtown Historic District.  My name is Dennis McCarthy.  I am a volunteer tour guide with Historic Denver.  Historic Denver was founded in 1970.  It focuses on historic preservation and advocacy.  It also operates the Molly Brown house museum, and offers walking tours of Denver’s historic neighborhoods.  Today we will be walking in a loop through Lower Downtown, finishing up one block down the street.,  This tour lasts 90 minutes.  

Lower Downtown, also known as LoDo, has two patterns.  One is historical.  The other architectural.  At each stop on the tour we will see those two patterns play out, with many variations and a few exceptions.

The historical pattern is three periods: development, decline, and transformation.  LoDo originally developed in the late 1800’s and early 1900’s as a commercial district, with many warehouses for wholesale businesses.  Then it went into decline in the decades after WWII, becoming a “skid row”.  Finally, starting in the 1980s, it was transformed into the residential neighborhood you see today.

On our tour today you will see many older buildings that have been transformed rather than replaced.  This was a result of LoDo being  designated an historic district in 1988.  Historic Denver played a leading role in that process.  In architecture and development, converting an old building to a new purpose is called “adaptive reuse”.   You can see many examples of this on the other side of the street, which is knows as “warehouse row”. 

The buildings from that initial development period exhibit the commercial style of their time.  On the outside, they are organized into three layers: bottom, middle and top.  I’ll explain this further when we get to our first building in this style.

There are a couple names that you will hear many times on this tour.  One is the architectural firm Gove and Walsh.  Aaron Gove and Thomas Walsh formed their partnership in 1894.  They designed many of the buildings here in LoDo, contributing to the district’s consistent commercial style.

The other name is developer Dana Crawford.  She is best known for her preservation efforts in Larimer Square, but was also involved in several of the adaptive reuse projects we will see on this tour.

  2 Union Station

We are going to start with the most important building in LoDo - Union Station.

Railroads played an essential role in Denver’s history.  During the 1860’s Denver’s population remained around 5000.  In the 1870’s it grew from 5000 to 35,000.  What happened to trigger that growth?  Starting in 1871, railroads connected Denver to the rest of the country.

By the end of the 1870’s, Denver was served by many railroads with separate stations.   The city decided to consolidate these into a single, shared facility, called the Union Depot.  It opened here in 1881.  That station was an Italian Romanesque design by William Taylor.  It consisted of a center section with wings on either side.  Show photo.  It was 503 feet long and 32 feet wide.  The wings you see today are original, but the center has been replaced.

By the early 20th century the station needed to expand to keep up with the  growing volume of traffic.  So the center section was replaced by a larger structure, in a different style.  It was designed by Gove and Walsh, and opened in 1914.  The new building had a larger footprint, extending far out from the wings towards Wynkoop Street.  This is not the commercial style.  It is called the Beaux Arts style, and is derived from classical architecture.  It certainly looks monumental.  

What is the exterior made of?  Granite base, terra-cotta tile above, finished to resemble granite.

In the decades after WWII, railroads declined as more Americans chose to travel by car or airplane rather than train.  That “Travel By Train” sign was added in 1953, visible evidence of the competition.  By the 1980s the number of trains stopping here daily had dropped from a peak of more than 80 down to 2. Gradually space inside the building switched from railroad functions to other uses.  And it fell into disrepair, like most of LoDo.

In 2001 the RTD purchased Union Station.  In 2004 it adopted its FasTrack plan, in which Union Station would become part of a multi-modal transportation center.  In 2016 new commuter rail lines started service in and out of Union Station.  

The building was renovated between 2012 and 2014.  The exterior was restored, and much of the interior was reconfigured into a hotel.  What’s the name of that hotel?  Dana Crawford was part of the team that won the contract to do the renovation.   3 Denver City Railway Building / Sheridan Building

The building behind me, across the street, opened in 1883 as the main terminal for the Denver City Railway Company.  Denver City Railway started the city’s first horse-drawn streetcar line in 1871.  That building looked very different than what you see today.  Show photo.  The building had a waiting room and car barns on the ground floor.  Horses were stabled on the second and third floors.  Hay and grain for the horses was stored in the attic.

This building underwent its first adaptive reuse in 1892, when it was converted to retail and commercial space.  So adaptive reuse goes back to the 1800’s in Denver.  The commercial style exterior that you see today was designed by the Baerresen brothers, architects who had emigrated from Denmark. 

Their design for the 17th Street side of the building (your right) is typical of LoDo buildings for this period.  It is organized into three layers: bottom, middle and top.  The bottom is the first floor.  It has larger windows than the floors above.  The middle contains the upper floor windows.  The top is a horizontal decorative band above the middle layer windows.

Let’s focus on the middle layer of this building.  It contains windows arranged in recessed panels.  There are five of these panels on this building.  Do you see them?  The panel nearest us is three windows wide, and so is the one after that.  The one in the middle is eight windows wide.  The vertical space separating the panels, that is not recessed looks, like a pier.

Each window has a stone sill below, and a curved brick lintel above.  The second and third floor lintels are simpler, shaped like a small segment of a larger circle.  That’s called a segmental arch lintel.  The top floor windows are more elaborate.  They have a semi-circular top, surrounded by a brick arcade.  This is borrowed from the Romanesque Revival style that was popular at the time.

We are going to see this pattern again in the middle layer of most buildings.  What will vary between buildings is the number of window columns per panel, the separation between the panels, and the window lintels and sills.

After 1972 this building sat vacant until its second adaptive reuse, when it was reconfigured into 43 loft condominiums above ground floor retail.  The Streetcar Stable Lofts opened in 1994.

This building has one of Denver’s architectural oddities.  Look up at the top floor windows in the panel nearest us.  If you were standing directly in front of the building, what would you see through those windows?  The sky!  
4 J.S. Brown Mercantile

The Wynkoop Brewing Company building across the intersection originally opened in 1899 as the Brown Mercantile building.  John Sydney Brown started his wholesale grocery business in Denver in 1861.  It grew to be one of the largest in the region.  This building was designed for Brown Mercantile by Gove and Walsh.  Unlike their Union Station design, this one is commercial style.

Do you see the bottom, middle and top layers on this building?

Let’s start at the top.  The top of this building extends outward.  That’s called a cornice.  Below the cornice there is a decorative brickwork transition between the cornice and the middle layer.  This is called corbelling.  

How does the middle of this building compare with the previous one?  The windows are organized in recessed panels, but here each panel is only one window wide and the space between panels is wider.  Again, the top floor windows are Romanesque, while the windows on the 2nd through 4th floors have segmental arch lintels.  

Do you see a clear boundary between the middle and bottom layers?  The horizontal stone band is called a string course.  

[There’s another one between below the fifth floor, interrupting the vertical lines of the recessed panels.  Commercial style buildings typically have a balance of horizontal and vertical lines.  How would this building look without that string course?]

On the 18th Street side (your left) the bottom layer has the main entrance in the center with large arched Romanesque windows on either side.  The rough cut foundation stone is visible for several feet above the sidewalk.  On the Wynkoop Street (right) side there is a terrace with outdoor seating for the brew pub.  Originally, this was a loading dock.  A railroad siding ran next to the building, and the loading dock was at the same level as the floor of boxcars.

After 1956 this building sat mostly empty.  In 1988, a group of investors formed the Wynkoop Brewing Company.  They purchased and renovated the building, putting a brew pub on the first floor, pool hall on the second floor, and loft residences above.  John Hickenlooper was one of those investors.  He went on to become mayor of Denver, governor of Colorado, and now U.S. senator.
5 Littleton / Beatrice Creamery and Cold Storage Warehouse

We are looking at a three building complex across the street.  Can you make them out?  These buildings were constructed from left to right for the Littleton Creamery, opening in 1903, 1912 and 1916.  All three were originally 5 stories.  Stories were added to the center and right buildings in 1917, but we are going to ignore those.

The Littleton Creamery opened in 1889 as a wholesale supplier of dairy products.  It was acquired by Beatrice Foods in 1912.  Look at the painted sign below the cornice on the building on the left.  It has Beatrice written over Littleton.

Do you see three layers on these buildings?
All three have a top layer with a cornice and corbelling.  All three have a bottom layer with larger windows and rusticated stone.  And all three have a stringcourse between the bottom and middle layers.  The center and right buildings have a middle layer with windows organized in recessed panels.

Two of these buildings were designed by Gove and Walsh.  One was not.  Which one?  Why?  The one on the left, because it looks different.

What makes it look different?  
The middle layer of the building on the left has a solid brick wall where windows should be.  Why?  The space behind the wall was refrigerated storage.  Windows let heat or cold in, making temperature control more difficult.  There was also  85,000 cu ft sawdust insulation inside.  To relieve the monotony of a large blank wall, they used alternating bands of different color bricks.  There is also a diamond pattern in the bricks on the top floor.  The polychrome brickwork and elaborate lintels on the first floor windows are borrowed from the Renaissance Revival style.

Beatrice Foods closed this facility in 1979.  In the early 1980’s it was acquired by a group of developers that included Dana Crawford.  They renamed it the Ice House, and converted the space into the Denver Design Center .  This was a complicated example of adaptive reuse.  First the building had to be thawed, which took weeks.  Then the insulation and coolant pipes were removed.  In 1997 a second group of developers converted the building into 89 condominiums.  Windows were added on the 18th Street side, and balconies were added on the far side of the buildings.
6 Union Pacific Freight House

The building across the intersection opened in 1923 as a freight depot for the Union Pacific RR.  Does it follow the bottom/middle/top pattern?   It does not have a distinct bottom and middle, and the windows are not in recessed panels.  This building was designed by UP engineers, not a Denver architect.  That’s probably why it does not follow the pattern that we see in other buildings. 

The building consists of a head house facing 19th Street, and a long corridor of loading docks behind that.  We’ll get a better view of those on our way to the next stop.  The front faces 19th Street and is dominated by a two story projecting entrance bay.  The entrance has Doric columns on either side and the name of the railroad engraved on a  terra-cotta panel above.  There is a UP logo on the parapet above the cornice.

In its heyday this depot handled 2000 rail cars per day.  So what is missing?  Originally there were rail yards next to the northeast and northwest sides of the building.  These were removed in the 1980’s, and the building fell into disuse. 

In the early 1990’s it was transformed into 36,000 square feet of restaurant and retail space.  That opened in 1995.

The building changed hands in 2021.  How much do you think a century old freight house in LoDo sold for?  $22.5 million.

7 Coors Field

Denver was awarded a NL expansion franchise in 1991.  The Rockies played the 1993 and 1994 seasons in Mile High Stadium, while this new ball park was under construction.  Coors field opened in 1995.

This land had previously been occupied by rail yards and a row of warehouses along Blake Street.  One of the design goals for the new stadium was for it to be “contextual”.  That a fancy way of saying that they wanted it to fit in with the older warehouse buildings of LoDo.  So they hired the same architects who had designed Camden Yards in Baltimore (HOK, now Populous).

The side of the ballpark is a three story brick wall, with structural steel above that.  The brick walls are intended to be reminiscent of the LoDo warehouses.  The bricks were supplied by Robinson Brick and Tile, who started making bricks in Denver in 1880.

Do you see any features that we saw on three layer buildings at previous stops?  
	•	There is a diamond pattern in polychrome brick, like the Littleton Creamery.  
	•	The middle has windows organized into inset panels.  
	•	The tops of the piers have a modest cornice with corbeling below.

What is the Rockies mascot?  Dinger, a triceratops.  Dinosaur bones were uncovered here during construction.  What is Coors Field noted for?  Home runs, due to dry air, not altitude.  Game baseballs are stored in a humidor.  Row 20 in the upper deck has purple seats.  They are at elevation one mile.
9 Merchandise Mart 

The building across the street opened in 1931.  It is the newest old building on our tour.  It was designed by architect Montana Fallis.  He came to Denver in 1886 to work for Frank Edbrooke, one of the city’s most prominent architects.  Fallis started his own business in 1914.  We’ll see another building designed by Fallis later in the tour.  

Fallis designed two other Denver buildings that opened the year before this one, an office building and the Mayan Theater.  Has anyone seen the Mayan Theater?  Those two buildings were Art Deco style, with exuberant decorations.  This building has some Art Deco elements, such as repeated patterns and geometric decorations.  But it is much more restrained and suitable for a warehouse district.

Does this building follow the bottom/middle/top pattern that we saw at previous stops?  While this building does have windows in recessed panels and a string course between the first and second floors, its organization is more complex than the three layer designed we have seen.

It uses two colors of brick, one lighter and the other darker.

The corners and ends are different from the rest of the building.  The corner has a tower on top, with geometric patterns of lighter colored brick.  The corner and ends have a recessed panel of light brick containing two columns of narrow windows.

The windows between the corner and ends are in recessed panels, with one column of windows per panel.  The panels are separated by dark brick piers.  Windows in the same column have light brick in between.  So you have a grid of vertical dark brick solid lines and horizontal light brick dashed lines.

The recessed panels are arranged in groups of three.  The piers separating the groups and wider than the piers separating the panels within the same group.  The windows in the middle column of each group are wider.

The ground floor is not as distinct from the floors above as in previous buildings.  The string course in between is minimal.  The bottom windows are only slightly different from those above.

This building never stood empty during LoDo’s skid row period.  In 1994 it was converted to 47 loft condos.  It was renamed the Rocky Mountain Warehouse Lofts.
8 Wazee Exchange Building

The building across the street was built during the 1880’s.  It is now called the Wazee Exchange, but that name is from the late 20th century.   The two sides of the building are very different.  Let’s start with the front side along 19th Street (your right).

Is the front of this building organized into bottom, middle and top?

What is noticeably different about this three layer building? 
Cornice … lintels … post and beam … Wazee side

The cornice is larger and more elaborate.  It is made of pressed metal.  It was fabricated in Brooklyn and shipped here by train.

The lintels above the middle layer windows are made of stone, not brick, with carved decorations.  The lintels on each side-by-side pair of windows in the same panel are attached to each other.

The pressed metal cornice and ornamental stone lintels are decorative features from the Italianate style, which was popular in Denver at the time.

On the 19th Street side, the bottom layer windows are not set in a brick wall.  There is more glass, almost a window wall.  The windows are framed in what looks like post and beam.  But what you see is more pressed metal, not the underlying structural material.

Do you see vertical lines running from top to bottom?  Look at one of the brackets on the cornice, and run your eyes down from there.  The bracket aligns with the brick panel separator in the middle section, and with the pressed metal posts on the bottom.  This vertical organization balances the strong horizontal lines of the cornice and the beam atop the ground floor windows.

The Wazee Street side is much simpler in organization, decoration, and building materials than the 19th Street front of the building.  The bricks on this side are called common bricks.  The ones on the front are called facing bricks.  The facing bricks are smoother and have more uniform color.  They are more expensive.

By the 1980’s this building sat vacant.  In 2009 it was renovated.  The front facade was restored, and an elevated walkway was added for accessibility .  On the Wazee side, the number of windows was doubled.  Can you tell the new windows from the old ones? The ones with segmental arched lintels are the originals. 11 Windsor Dairy

The entire block across the street is now called the Dairy Block.  This redevelopment project was completed in 2017.  This side of the block is all new buildings.  We are going to walk to the far side of the block, to see an older building that was renovated.

The project also created this “activated alley”.  In LoDo’s skid row period you would have avoided this alley.  Now it’s a destination.  The sculpture here at the alley entrance is called Spilt Milk.  There’s another play on words father down the alley: LoDough Bakery.

The name of the Dairy Block comes from this building.  It opened in 1918 for the Windsor Farm Dairy.  The farm was in SE Denver, and the milk was processed into dairy products here.  This building was designed by Fisher & Fisher, a prominent Denver architecture firm in the early 20th century.

The building was purchased in 1928 by Beatrice, which continued to use it for dairy processing until 1973.  Show old photo.  At some point after that, windows and doors were added.  The Windsor Farm Dairy was renovated as part of the Dairy Block project, and now contains shops and offices.

Does this building follow the top/middle/bottom pattern?  Scan the building from left to right.  Do you see a pattern?
This building has a horizontal organization, not the vertical bottom/middle/top that we have seen.  It consists of alternating door and window sections.

What is the difference between the window and door sections?
	•	window sections are wider
	•	window sections have larger windows 
	•	window sections have terra cotta name panel above windows
	•	window sections are slightly recessed relative to the door sections
	•	window sections have a slightly lower parapet

What is different about the brickwork on this building?
The mortar between the bricks is deeply inset. 
10 Crocker Cracker Factory

The corner building across the street was built in 1881 for F.W. Crocker & Co. as a cracker factory.  After a couple mergers it became part of the National Biscuit Co., now known as Nabisco.  Nabisco continued to operate this factory until 1945.  After that, it was used as a warehouse.

How does this building follow the top/middle/bottom pattern?
	•	The top is a cornice with corbelling below.  
	•	The middle has three story tall inset panels, each containing one column of windows.  All of the windows have stone sills and segmental arch lintels.  
	•	Note the variation: dogtooth brick below sills. 
	•	There is rusticated stone along the bottom of the ground floor.

Where does it deviate from the bottom/middle/top pattern?
It does not have a distinct bottom layer like we have seen in other buildings.  The middle layer inset panels extend down to the first floor, so the ground floor windows are the same as in the floors above.

In 1983 a development project transformed the old factory building into office space and constructed the new Blake Street Terrace next door.  The new building was designed to resemble the old one.  What’s the word for that?  “Contextual”

How does the Blake Street Terrace resemble the cracker factory?  
It has (1) a brick exterior, (2) columns of windows in inset panels, and (3) a brick cornice with corbelling.  But the second and third floors are occupied by a parking garage, not offices.  That’s why those panels contain metal gratings instead of windows.
12 General Electric Building

The building across the intersection was built in 1906 for the Denver Rock Drill and Machinery Company.  In the 1930’s it was acquired by General Electric, who used it as a warehouse for electrical supplies.

Does this building follow the top/middle/bottom organization?  How?
	•	The top is a pressed metal cornice, deeper that the brick ones we have seen.  
	•	The middle has recessed panels for windows, one column per panel
	•	The bottom has large storefront windows framed by pressed metal decorative posts and beams.

What’s different about these recessed panels?
	•	The top of each panel is rounded, but the window within is not.  There is a circle inside the semi-circle.  Some of the circles are empty, other have a decorative filling.  
	•	Between the windows there is a contrasting dark panel with a white terra-cotta triangle.

In 1982 the building was restored and converted to offices.  The biggest change on the exterior was adding openings that allow light into the basement, so that it could be rented as office space.  On the Blake Street side (your left), windows were added to an existing loading dock.  On the 18th Street side (your right), look at the low wall with railings along the sidewalk.  There is a light well between it and the building down to the basement floor.  Full size windows were added on the basement wall facing the light well.
13 Windsor Stables/Storefront

The building across the street opened in 1881.  It was subdivided into 10 units for small businesses, with space for an office or residence above.  This is the smallest possible example of the top/middle/bottom pattern.  

How does this building follow the top/middle/bottom pattern?  

The top is a cornice with large brackets between units.  The ground floor has plate glass windows and metal columns.  There is a stone stringcourse above the ground floor.  The middle is just one story.  Each unit has an inset panel with three windows.  The windows have stone lintels that are connected within each panel.  

The panel separators line up with the brackets above, and continue below the stringcourse on the ground floor.  They balance the horizontal lines of the cornice and stringcourse.  Where have we seen this before?  Wazee Exchange.  It has similar Italianate features.

This building differs from the others we have seen in one aspect.  It does not extend all the way back to the alley that bisects the block.  There was another building between this one and the alley.  It was a stables, once associated with the nearby Windsor Hotel.  By 1930 that had been replaced by a parking lot.

In 1974, developer Bill Saslow purchased the then empty building and converted it into townhomes over retail, with finished basements.  This marked the beginning of LoDo’s recovery from its “skid row” phase.  The building was rebranded as the Blake Street Bath and Racquet Club.  Where are these amenities?  The former site of the stables is now occupied by a pool and tennis court for the condo owners.
14a St. Elmo Hotel

We are back at 17th Street, which runs between Union Station and the downtown business district.  In the late 1800’s, 17th Street became “hotel row”, anchored at either end by the luxurious Oxford Hotel near Union Station and the Brown Palace at Broadway.  The hotels in between were more modest.  Although they are not warehouses, these hotels are commercial style buildings.  So, architecturally, you can think of them as “warehouses for people”.

The Saint Elmo Hotel opened in 1896.  It catered to railway workers and budget-conscious travelers.  Here is a photo of the hotel in its heyday.  Clearly this is a place for beer drinkers, not consumers of fine wines or fancy cocktails.  The saloon on the corner reflects the hotel’s clientele.  

Do you see the three layers on this building? What are the significant differences from other buildings we have seen?
	•	top
	•	middle
	•	corners
  
The top of this building has a deep eave, with brackets underneath.  The underside of the eave and the brackets are colorful.  A deep eave with brackets is a common feature in Italianate buildings.  Below the that there is a band of wreath decorations, and then a string course marking the boundary between the top and middle layers.

The middle layer does not have recessed panels for the windows.  The window lintels are elaborate.  Lines of inset brick radiate upwards.  These meet horizontal bands that connect the lintels of neighboring windows.

The corners of the building are not square.  The are cut at a 45 degree angle.  That’s called a chamfered corner.  In the middle layer those horizontal brick bands wrap around the corner.  In the bottom layer there are corner entrances on the ground floor.

Which lines dominate, horizontal or vertical?

The building sat vacant for several years during LoDo’s period of decline.  In the 1980’s it was renovated and converted to offices above ground floor restaurants.
14b Hotel Barth

The building across the street opened in 1882 as a warehouse for the Union Liquor Wholesale Company, which was owned by Moritz Barth.  It was designed by prominent Denver architect Frederick Eberley.

This is our earliest example of adaptive reuse.  In the late 1880’s the Union Warehouse was converted to a 100 room hotel named the Union Hotel.  Why Union?  The hotel had a series of names and owners in subsequent decades.  In 1930 it was purchased by Alan Barth, the son of Moritz Barth.  He renamed it the Hotel Barth, and remodeled the entrance and lobby.

Which of the buildings we have already seen does this one most resemble?  Wazee Exchange or Blake Street Bath and Racquet Club - large pressed metal cornice with brackets, window panel separators below brackets, continue onto ground floor.

How does this building differ from other 3 layer buildings we have seen?
	•	elaborate cornice
	•	crazy quilt of middle layer windows

The brackets on this cornice are larger, with an unusual decoration on top.  The hotel up 17th Street has them too.  

The windows are arrange differently on every floor in the middle layer.  In your mind, draw a vertical line down the middle of the center recessed panel.  The middle section of the building is symmetric, mirror images on either side.  The windows are connected by a stone stringcourse sill and stone between the windows below their lintels.

The hotel stayed in operation until 1980, when it was purchased by a non-profit and converted into 62 subsidized housing units above retail.  It is operated by Senior Housing Options.
15  Oxford Hotel and Oxford Annex

The building across the intersection is the Oxford Hotel. It opened in 1891, and is Denver’s oldest surviving hotel.  It was designed by Frank Edbrooke, who next designed the Brown Palace at the other end of hotel row.  It had 400 rooms, with luxurious decorations and amenities. 

Do you see three layers on this building?  What is different about this building? 
	•	top: castellated parapet
	•	middle: no inset panels
	•	bottom: exposed steel

The top layer is a parapet with alternating sections.  On is shorter and wider, with protruding decorative brick.  The other is taller and narrower and plain.  This pattern suggests the top of a castle wall.

There are no inset panels for the windows in the middle layer.  The windows are arranged in pairs of columns.  There is a row of Romanesque windows, but not on the top floor.  The rectangular windows have red terra-cotta decorations next to their top corners.

On the ground floor the posts and beams are exposed structural steel, with decorations atop the the posts.

In 1912 the hotel expanded by adding an annex on the far side of the alley.  It was designed by Montana Fallis and Robert Willison.  As you can see, it is completely different from the original.  This is not the commercial style. 

What makes this building look so different?  
	•	The exterior is white terra-cotta finished to resemble marble, not red brick.  Where have we seen this before?  
	•	Above the ground floor the center projects out towards the street.  That has radial corners with matching curved windows.  
	•	The bottom has four large columns, with large brackets in the center that seem to support the projection.
	•	The top has an elaborately sculpted cornice with ornate paired brackets connected by rings.

The hotel declined with the neighborhood during LoDo’s “skid row” period, becoming an overnight boarding house.  In 1979 it was purchased by Charles Calloway, who was joined by Dana Crawford the following year.  A three year, $12M restoration was completed in 1983.
16  Rockmount Ranch Wear Building 

Note the Jack Weil street sign at 17th and Wazee.

This building was built in 1909 for the Wolff Manufacturing Company.  It was designed by William Fisher, later a partner in Fisher and Fisher.  Rockmount Ranch Wear moved into this building in 1946, using it as a warehouse.  Their offices moved here in 1980, and the retail store opened in 2002.  A 2004 restoration exposed its heavy timber interior framing and tin ceiling.

It is a straightforward top/middle/bottom design in brown brick.  The top is a parapet, the middle has three inset panels of windows.  What is distinctive about this design?  Decorative white terra-cotta pendants, squares, parapet cap, and stringcourse.

The building is more significant for its occupant that for its architecture.  Rockmount Ranch Wear was founded in 1946 by Jack Weil.  He designed the first western shirts with snaps instead of buttons.  His shirts also featured yokes, a tailored fit and vintage “smile” pockets.  Rockmount shirts are sold around the world.  They are also on display in several museums, including the Smithsonian.

Jack Weil lived to age 107, and was at one time the oldest working CEO in the U.S.  It is  still a family owned business, maintaining a consistency of design across four generations.  
17  Sugar Building 

The building across the intersection opened in 1906 as the headquarters for the Great Western Sugar Company.  The business was founded by Charles Boettcher in 1901.  He was inspired by visiting sugar beat farms while on a trip to his native Germany.  His company helped to create one of the largest industries in eastern Colorado.

The Sugar building was designed by Gove and Walsh.  It was initially four stories. Two stories were added later, giving it the proportions of a sugar cube.  This is two buildings in one.  The front half, facing 16th Street (left), was office space.  The back half, visible from Wazee Street (right) was a warehouse.

Let’s start with the front half.  Do you see three layers?  What’s different?  
	•	decorations on panel separators emphasize the vertical
	•	balanced by original cornice above 4th floor
	•	band of unusual windows between cornice and top floor

How does the back half compare with the front half?
	•	different color brick
	•	more modest cornice
	•	more vertical orientation, due to no 4th floor stringcourse (Sullivanesque)

The Sugar Building was renovated in 2000.  It is now all office space.  The original Otis bird cage elevator is still in use.  In 2018 an extension called the SugarSquare was added to the warehouse section.
18a  Morey Mercantile Building 

That’s the Morey Mercantile building behind me, across the intersection.  Charles Stephen Morey came to Colorado in 1872 for his health.  He founded Morey Mercantile in 1884.  The company moved into this building in 1896.  It was designed by Gove and Walsh.  It contained offices, a showroom and warehouse space.  

How does this building differ from other 3 layer buildings we have seen?
	1.	entrance on second floor
	2.	middle layer window arrangement
	3.	ground floor
	4.	ghost signs on parapet above cornice

The main entrance is on the second floor!  That’s because 16th Street was a viaduct.  Show photo.  The building was connected to the viaduct by a short walkway.

Some of the windows in the middle layer are in recessed panels.  But the ones on the top floor and the ones at the sides are not.  Also, the top floor windows are smaller.

The ground floor windows are not larger than the ones above.  The ground floor walls have horizontal lines crated by inset courses in the brickwork.  On the Wynkoop Street side there was a loading dock next to railroad tracks, like we saw at Brown Mercantile.

The cornice is relatively deep, and there is a relatively tall parapet above, with ghost signs.  Solitaire was the Morey Mercantile house brand.

In 1956 Morey Mercantile was acquired by Consolidated Foods.  The building entered a long period of decline.  In the 1994 the building was renovated by a group that included John Hickenlooper (of the Wynkoop Brewery) and Joyce Meskis of the Tattered Cover Book Store.  The Tattered Cover moved into the lower two floors, and the upper floors were converted to the Morey Mercantile Lofts.
18b Barteldes Seed Building

Barteldes Seeds moved into this building 1906.  It is yet another Gove and Walsh three layer design.

How does this building differ from other 3 layer buildings we have seen?
	1.	entrance on second floor
	2.	middle layer window arrangement
	3.	ground floor

The main entrance is on the second floor, like the Morey Mercantile, connected to the viaduct by a short walkway

You could say that windows in the middle layer are not arranged in inset columns.  Or you could say that they are all placed in a single large panel that is inset with a corbelled  border. 

The ground floor windows are not larger than the ones above. They have sunburst lintels,  The windows and lintels are connected by horizontal lines created by inset courses of bricks. Where have we seen this before?  The middle layer of the St. Elmo Hotel.

The building was occupied by various businesses during LoDo’s period of decline.  In 1987 it was transformed into a mixed use development, with residential lofts above offices.  The windows above the second floor were enlarged at that time.
19 Conclusion

What have we seen on this tour?  I would describe it as variations on a theme.  LoDo has a historical pattern and an architectural pattern.  The buildings we have seen follow those patterns, with many variations and a few exceptions.

The historical pattern for LoDo consists of three periods: development, decline and transformation.  Most of the buildings we have seen were built in the late 1800’s and early 1900’s as warehouses and offices for wholesale companies.  In the decades after WWII they fell out of use.  Then, starting in the 1980’s they were transformed into loft residences above first floor restaurants and retail.  That is, they underwent adaptive reuse.

The architectural pattern for LoDo is the organization of the exterior of buildings into three layers: bottom/middle/top.  The bottom is the first floor, with large windows for shops and restaurants.  The middle is the floors above, with columns of windows set in recessed panels.  The top is a cornice or parapet.

So remember this pair of triplets: development/decline/transformation periods and bottom/middle/top layers.  If you do, you can amaze friends, family and visitors with your understanding of LoDo!

Thank you for coming on today’s tour.  I hope to see you again on another Historic Denver walking tour.  I will stick around if anyone needs directions or has questions.


